---
title: "Primer Design and qPCR"
description: "Sydney's reflection 03/05/2021"
author: "Sydney Greenlee"
---

I thoroughly enjoyed this week’s discussion about PCR design and applications. The paper choice was timely and interesting. I had never read any scientific papers about COVID (or any other medical-field papers) previously and it was nice to know more about the PCR assays used in COVID testing. Additionally, I was impressed with the speed at which they developed and optimized the assay. It wasn’t perfect, as we saw in the paper with primer-dimers

Something I enjoyed about this week’s paper (Park et al. 2020) was the section on endpoint multiplexing. I had only been exposed to qPCR multiplexing, where each target has a unique fluorescent probe read on different channels (e.g., one FAM probe and one HEX probe). It’s clever to utilize gel electrophoresis of different product lengths for multiplexing. Though it may not be as sequence-specific as a probe-based assay, it’s certainly more cost-effective. As a diagnostic tool, using 4 bands of amplification rather than 1 defends against nonspecific amplification and provides confidence in a positive or negative result. It was also interesting to see in Figure 6 the competition between the 4 primers used in multiplexing. All bands are equally dark when primer sets are run individually (6a), but in the positive control multiplex, the bands are different concentrations (6c), suggesting that some of the primers are outcompeting each other. The shortest-length band in the figure is very faint- I wonder if more optimization of the multiplex reaction should be done or if it’s suitable for use as-is. It’s fun to delve into the complicated world of multiplexing!

I especially appreciated the Biomeme demonstration, as I have used the device quite a bit in my research. Kudos for a great demo! Compared to a benchtop thermocycler (Bio-Rad CFX96 system), quantitative PCR results were very similar! The Biomeme and similar devices have great community science-driven eDNA survey capabilities, for harmful algal bloom species to monitoring other taxa of interest. Though it has some drawbacks (low throughput, to name one), it has a lot of potential in remote fieldwork and community science applications due to its relatively low cost and portability. It could potentially be helpful for COVID detection in remote regions or those without funds for a benchtop thermocycler (if tests conducted by medical professionals, of course). 
