---
title: eDNA overview reflection
description: reflection one for blog post
author: Sam Silverbrand
---

Overall, this weeks review paper were similar to other reviews I’ve read in the eDNA field and were very familiar to me. I still think that even for someone with more exposure to eDNA, the Cristescu paper still provided good insight into the field and raised some interesting questions. The discussion I had within my breakout group in particular, about determining false negatives and false positives and the continuing questions in the field as a whole (protocols, data analysis), were really nice to discuss and debate about and can open up a wide new field of opportunities and ideas. As for the TallBear paper, I learned quite a bit from reading this paper and discussing with my group. In particular, I liked the conversation we had as a class about what articulation is and how perspectives are constantly changing. The most important discussion I think we had from this paper, however, was that of how it relates to eDNA. My group and then the class as a whole had a really amazing discussion about how scientists/ the science communities does or does not communicate with local indigenous people, what the implications of genetic information we gain from eDNA will have on their communities, and if they want that information at all. This discussion is so important and poignant in our development as good researchers, because as scientists we all need to be more inclusive and aware of the impacts we’re having outside of just a close knit scientific community. I’m not sure taking advantage of is the best way to put it, but we often “take advantage of” the knowledge we gain without thinking about the people it impacts or their lack of awareness about our knowledge. I hope we keep having discussions like this. 