---
title: Module 10 – Guest Speaker Ole Shelton
description: Reflection of week ten's class
author: Rachel Presley
---

During this week’s class, we had a guest speaker, Ole Shelton, present. He talked about eDNA research in general and how it compares to other traditional methods. The idea behind sampling for eDNA is that you sample some volume of water from an environment and can use eDNA methods to tell you what organisms were there recently. He used the phrase “series of ladders” to describe sampling processes. You have a state and observations, which can be different types of surveys (ie. dive survey, acoustic survey, etc.). He compared eDNA to a new kind of “net” for surveying that is complicated and requires more lab time, but also provides cost and efficiency benefits. Next, he discussed an example for Chinook Salmon outmigration where traditional survey and eDNA methods were being used. He discussed whether or not these different kinds of “nets” gave similar answers. In terms of abundance and biomass for the site-specific scale they are similar, but there is some variability. For population scale, the abundance and biomass data are nearly identical between the two methods. As far as variability is concerned, the eDNA method seems to be better than the traditional seine method. eDNA methods seem to have a greater effective area that they are sampling compared to traditional surveying methods (i.e. seining). However, traditional methods will likely still be necessary in the future and eDNA methods will probably not completely replace traditional surveying methods. The next example he discussed was about Pacific Hake, which is the largest groundfish fishery on the west coast of the United States). In this example, he discussed how eDNA methods compared to the traditional surveying method acoustic monitoring (which only captures individuals 2+ years old). 