---
title: Week 3 Reflection - Study Design
description: Reflection on the third week of EES 590, discussing study design.
author: Kyle Oliveira
---

This week we discussed study design, focusing on different methods of forming hypotheses, sampling approaches, and understanding needs for metadata. In developing our study designs, there are multiple limits to consider (funding, time, resources, etc.); these constraints may prevent us from accomplishing all we set out to do, but they are important to consider to get the best results from our research. When developing hypotheses, including multiple competing hypotheses can allow researchers to take a more holistic approach, and include many variables in their study; however, this can lead to an infinite loop as more questions arise, when answers are found. A part of lecture we did not get to, but I found important was data management, which is important for the interpretation of results, as well as for clarity amongst fellow researchers and oneself. 

The paper read for class, written by deSouza et al. (2016), touched on this, as their models included covariates like permeability of the soil, and water flow. Discussion surrounding this paper let me consider covariates I would like to include in my own research on white shark distribution (lunar cycle, temperature, seal population/proximity, etc.). deSouza et al. (2016) also touched on the importance of understanding the natural history of the species in question; their two species are recorded as cold and warm season spawners, informing their sampling seasons to collect data. Although that practice was a bit controversial in the class because it makes the sampling not random, it shows the researchers had a good grasp on the behavior and natural history of their focus species. Study design was a relevant topic for week 3, as I look to begin developing plans for field season this upcoming Spring, and my group begins to develop ideas for a final project.