---
title: Fundamentals of eDNA Reflection 1
description: Week 1 Reflection 
author: Emmaeve Jourdain 
---

I found the discussion papers from this week really interesting and each gave me a different insight on eDNA research. The paper by Tallbear (2013) made me take the time to consider the moral obligations and complications associated with genetics work and eDNA research. I think it is understandable that there can be a divide between scientists and different groups of people, such as indigenous people, but that does not have to be the case. In the context of this paper, the genetic approach to labeling someone as indigenous is very clear cut and looks at only one factor with genes, however in reality there are many other factors that are involved for determining one’s identity. It is almost a disservice to someone to try and label them based solely on their genes and thus I think genetics research should be used to augment tribal decisions but not be the only consideration. This connects well to our discussion about articulation and how definitions can be very dynamic depending on historical context and point of view. This paper also made me consider the impacts of eDNA research on other people and the environment. Even though eDNA is a less invasive method of sampling, we still have an impact on the environment and our presence there may not be welcomed by all. While this should not stop us from doing our work, it is important to remember that the environment we work in is a shared resource and be conscious and respectful of that. The Cristescu et al paper was a little simpler to read as it reviewed many of the fundamentals of eDNA research that I had some prior knowledge of. However, I learned about eDNA in sediment and the various complications associated with determining the origin of eDNA in this medium due to leaching, transport and burrowing organisms. While my research is primarily focused on eDNA in water samples, it is still important to consider how eDNA may be transported from one medium to the next. 
