---
title: "Extraction methods"
description: "Sydney's extraction methods reflection"
author: "Sydney Greenlee"
---
Extraction methods are deceivingly complex- at first glance, they all have similar steps. They even have similar results, though some filter tests reveal differences in DNA yield from the kits. Are these differences in yield significant in downstream applications? I have been thinking about one of our discussion questions this week: is DNA concentration important when selecting an extraction method? For metabarcoding and sequencing, it shouldn’t make too much of a difference, provided your extract accurately reflects environmental ratios. Some of our lab’s results show essentially the same metabarcoding results for different extraction methods. 

In qPCR and other quantitative applications, yield would influence results. But is a higher yield necessarily better? Which kit's concentration most accurately reflects the true eDNA concentration? And is it even worth the effort to determine this value? Many qPCR assays rely on relative quantification. Even if one calculates the number of gene copies per cell, how many cells per metazoan? How do you relate copy number to organism quantity in a meaningful way, and how does extraction yield affect this? To me, these extraction tests suggest that consistency is key- quantitatively comparing samples extracted with different kits would require some adjustment of values due to the differences in yield. As long as samples are extracted with the same method (including variability due to different people extracting), they should be comparable. I am of the mind that there are no completely perfect methods. We should aim high, but balance effectiveness, cost, and efficiency in a realistic way. At the end of the day, consistency provides an avenue for strong results and repeatability.