This week’s topic was “Emerging Technologies.” Of all the new methods mentioned during lecture and the student led discussion on Wednesday, I think PCR blockers, mRNA, and Stable Isotopes would be most valuable to learn for my research. 
For example: both stable isotopes and PCR blockers could be used to determine what juvenile alewife are eating. Karen Wilson has shown that juvenile alewife switch from a pelagic diet to a litoral diet as they age using stable isotopes. There is still a lot of mystery around what species of both zooplankton and phytoplankton juvenile alewife are eating. Other studies have used fluorometric microscopy to determine whether cyanobacteria (phycocyanin pigment) or green algae (chlorophyll pigment) are found in juvenile alewife stomachs, however, the fish used in such studies are older than the age I plan on studying. Larval and early juvenile alewife are extremely small so dissecting stomachs or performing a gut rinse is very challenging. I plan to homogenize whole specimens rather than attempting to remove the alewife stomachs. One of the downsides of running a bulk sample is that the host DNA will drown out any other DNA signal, thus, a PCR blocker of alewife DNA will have to be used (and designed YIKES). Adding mRNA to the gut diet study would enable me to determine what was recently ingested which could help pinpoint when the pelagic to littoral foraging strategy occurs with juvenile alewife and whether this shift in strategy is due to resource availability or other factors. 
